RU-16-03-0002-231121/FAQ

Pradhan Mantri Kisan Samman Nidhi (PM- KISAN)
(Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare)
Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
November 23, 2021
1. What is Pradhan Mantri Kisan Samman Nidhi?
Pradhan Mantri Kisan Samman Nidhi (PM-KISAN) is a new Central Sector Scheme
to provide income support to all landholding farmers' families in the country to
supplement their financial needs for procuring various inputs related to agriculture
and allied activities as well as domestic needs. Under the Scheme, the entire financial
liability towards transfer of benefit to targeted beneficiaries will be borne by the
Government of India.
2. When was the scheme launched?
The PM-KISAN Scheme was launched by the Prime Minister Narendra Modi on
February 24, 2019.
3. From which date the Scheme has come into effect?
The scheme takes effect from December 01,2018.
4. What are the benefits of the Scheme?
Under the PM-KISAN scheme, all landholding farmers' families shall be provided the
financial benefit of Rs.6000/- per annum per family payable in three equal instalments
of Rs.2000/- each every four months.
5. What is the definition of 'family' under the Scheme?
A landholder farmer's family is defined as "a family comprising of husband, wife and
minor children who own cultivable land as per the land records of the concerned
State/UT". The existing land-ownership system will be used for identification of
beneficiaries for calculation of benefit.
6. Who are eligible to get benefits under the Scheme?
All landholding farmer families, which have cultivable landholding in their names are
eligible to get benefit under the scheme. In the beginning when the PM-KISAN
Scheme was launched on February 24, 2019, its benefits were admissible only to
Small & Marginal Farmers' (SMF) families, with combined landholding of up to two
hectares. The Scheme was later on revised w.e.f. June 01, 2019 and extended to all
farmer families irrespective of the size of their landholdings.

7. Who are not eligible to get benefits under the Scheme? (What are the Exclusion
Criteria under the Scheme?)
The following categories of farmers are not eligible to get the benefits of the PMKISAN Scheme:
(i) All institutional land holders; and
(ii) Farmer families in which one or more of its members belong to following
categories:
a) Former and present holders of constitutional posts.
b) Former and present ministers/ State Ministers and former/present
Members of Lok Sabha/ Rajya Sabha/ State Legislative Assemblies/
State Legislative councils, former and present mayors of Municipal
corporations, former and present Chairpersons of District Panchayats.
c) All serving or retired officers and employees of Central/ State
Government ministries /Offices/Departments and its field units;
Central or State PSEs and Attached offices /Autonomous institutions
under Government as well as regular employees of the Local Bodies
(Excluding Multi-Tasking staff / Class IV/Group D employees)
d) All superannuated/retired pensioners having pension of Rs.10,000/- or
more (However, serving or retired multi-tasking staff (MTS)/ Class 4/
Group D employees are eligible to get benefit under the Scheme,
provided their families are otherwise eligible and not covered under
other exclusion criteria.)
e) All Persons who paid income Tax in last assessment year.
f) Professionals like Doctors, Engineers' Lawyers, Chartered
Accountants, and Architects registered with Professional bodies and
carrying out profession by undertaking practices.
8. If there are multiple farmer families whose names are recorded on a single
landholding whether each farmer's family is eligible to get benefit of the scheme?
lf so, what is the quantum of minimum financial benefit that such families will
get under the scheme?
Each of such farmer family would be separately eligible for the benefit under the
scheme up to the extent of Rs. 6000/- provided they are otherwise eligible as per
scheme guidelines.
9. What will happen if the beneficiary gives incorrect declaration for the
implementation of the Scheme?
In case of incorrect declaration, the beneficiary shall be liable for recovery of
transferred financial benefit and other penal actions as per law.
10. What is the cut-off date for determination of eligibility of beneficiaries under the
scheme?

The cut-off date for determination of eligibility of beneficiaries under the scheme is
February 01, 2019 and no changes thereafter shall be considered for eligibility of
benefit under the scheme for next five years, except transfer of land on succession in
case of death of landholder.
11. Whether the scheme benefits will be allowed in cases where transfer of
ownership of cultivable land takes place after the cut-off date of February 01,
2019 on account of succession due to death of the landowner?
Yes. The Scheme benefits will be allowed in all such cases where transfer of
ownership of cultivable land has taken place after the cut-off date of February 01,
2019 on account of succession due to death of the landowner.
12. Is any person/farmer who is not having land holding in his/her own name,but is
cultivating land owned by his / her father / forefathers is eligible to get benefit
under the Scheme?
No. The land must be in his/her own name. If the land ownership has been transferred
in his/her name on account of succession then he/she will be eligible.
13. Is any person/farmer who is cultivating a land but is not having the landholding
in his/her own name, for example tenant farmers, eligible to get benefit under the
Scheme?
No. Land holding is the sole criteria to avail the benefit under the Scheme
14. How the beneficiaries under the Scheme will be identified and shortlisted for
payment of intended benefit?
The responsibility of identifying the eligible farmers' families for benefit under the
scheme is entirely of the State/UT Governments. The prevailing land-ownership
system / record of land in different States/Union Territories will be used to identify
the intended beneficiaries for transfer of scheme benefits.
15. What is the mandatory information required to be submitted on PM-KISAN
portal for the transfer of benefits?
The following information / documents are required to be furnished by the farmers for
enrolment under PM-KISAN Scheme:
i.
ii.
iii.
iv.

Name, Age, Gender and Category (SC/ST)
Aadhaar Number
Bank Account Number and IFSC Code.
Mobile number - though it is not mandatory but it is advised that when
available it may be provided so that the information related to transfer of
benefit can be communicated.

16. How does a landholder farmer’ family know that his/her name is included in the
list of beneficiaries?
The beneficiary lists would be displayed at Panchayats to ensure greater transparency
and information. Further, States/UTs would notify the sanction of benefit to the

beneficiary through system generated SMS. He/she can also ascertain his status
through the Farmers’ Corner in the PM-KISAN portal.
17. What is the remedy available for eligible beneficiary if his/her name is not
included in the list of beneficiaries?
All such farmer families whose names are not included in the list of beneficiaries can
approach the District Level Grievance Redressal Monitoring Committee in their
Districts for inclusion of their names in the beneficiary list. Further, the Government
has created an exclusive Farmers' Corner in the PM-KISAN web-portal
www.pmkisan.gov.in giving the following facilities to the farmers through three
separate options/links:
(i)

New Farmer's Registration - Through this link, the farmers can submit their details
online. The online Form has certain mandatory fields as well self-declaration
regarding the eligibility. Once the Form is filled in and submitted successfully by
the farmer, the same is forwarded by an automated process to the State Nodal
Officer (SNO) for verification. The SNO verifies the details filled in by the farmer
and uploads the verified data on the PM-KISAN portal. Thereafter the data is
processed through an established system for payment.

(ii)

Edit Aadhaar details - Through this link the farmer can edit his/her name
himself/herself as per details in the Aadhaar Card. The edited name then gets
updated after authentication through the system.

(iii)

Beneficiary Status - Through this link, by quoting their Aadhaar Number or Bank
Account Number or the registered Mobile Number, the beneficiaries can
themselves ascertain the status of payment of their installments.

18. In case of landholding (owned by family members) spread across different
revenue records in the same or different villages, districts or States, how will the
benefit be transferred to the family?
ln such cases, the farmer's family will be entitled to get the benefit at one place only.
The State Nodal Officers (SNOs) will ensure that no duplicate payments are released
to any family.
19. Will monetary benefit under the Scheme be directly credited into beneficiary
accounts?
Yes. The financial benefit under the scheme shall be directly credited into bank
accounts of beneficiaries.
20. Whether it is compulsory for beneficiaries to give their bank account details?
Yes, the beneficiaries are required to provide their bank account details along with
their Aadhaar number so that the financial benefit under the scheme directly credited
into their bank accounts. No benefit can be given if bank account details have not
been provided.

21. Can States/UTs provide certified lists of beneficiaries on the PM-KISAN Portal
in phases or in batches as and when they are finalized?
Yes. States/UTs can provide list of eligible beneficiaries as and when they are
finalized based on the eligibility criteria in batches/phrases. The benefits will be
released on regular basis based on the approved list provided by the States/UTs.
22. Are farmers in those villages which are situated in urban areas eligible for the
benefit of the Scheme?
There is no distinction between urban and rural cultivable land under the scheme.
Both are covered under the scheme, provided that land situated in urban areas is under
actual cultivation.
23. Whether micro land holdings are admissible for availing the benefit of the
Scheme?
Micro land holdings, which are not cultivable, are excluded from the benefit under the
scheme.
24. What is the cut-off date for 'minor' children becoming 'major' under the
Scheme?
The cut-off date for minor children becoming 'major' is February 01, 2019
25. Whether farmers may avail the benefit of the Scheme against agricultural land
being used for non -agricultural purposes?
No. Agricultural land being used for non-agricultural purposes will not be covered for
benefit under the scheme.
26. What is the procedure of release of installments to the beneficiaries?
a. An exclusive web-portal, namely, www.pmkisan.gov.in has been created for
uploading of beneficiaries' data by the State/UT Governments.
b. The eligible farmers may apply with the village Patwaris, revenue officials or
other designated officers/agencies and submit their required details to them.
c. Nodal Officers appointed by State/UT Governments at Block/ Taluk/ District level
process the data and transfer them to State Nodal Officers (SNOs).
d. SNOs finally authenticate the data and upload them in batches from time to-time
on the portal.
e. The data of the beneficiaries uploaded by the SNOs passes through multi-level
verification by the National Informatics Centre (NIC), the Public Finance
Management System (PFMS) and the banks.
f. Based on the verified/validated data, the SNOs sign the Request for Transfer
(RFT) of fund, containing the total number of beneficiaries contained in a
particular batch and total amount of fund to be transferred for that batch, and
upload it on the portal.
g. Based on the RFT, the PFMS issues a Fund Transfer Order (FTO).

h. Based on the FTO, the Department of Agriculture, Cooperation & Farmers
Welfare issues the sanction order for the amount mentioned in the FTO.
i. The amount is transferred to the bank accounts of the beneficiaries, held in
destination banks, through the accredited bank of Department and the sponsoring
bank of the State/UT Governments, using the PFMS portal. The destination bank
can be a Schedule Bank, Post office, Rural Bank, Cooperative Bank or any other
financial institution. The entire banking transaction is managed and monitored by
the National Payment Corporation of India (NPCI).
27. If a farmer registered under the Scheme does not receive any installment in any
four-monthly period for any reason, whether he/she be able to receive the same
later on?
Yes. The beneficiaries, whose names are uploaded on PM-KISAN portal by the
concerned State/UT Governments in a particular four-monthly period, shall be
entitled to receive the benefit for that period with effect from that four-monthly period
itself. If they do not receive the payment of installment pertaining to that fourmonthly period and subsequent installments for any reason, except due to rejection for
falling within the exclusion criteria, they are entitled to receive the benefits of all the
due installments as and when the cause of delay is removed/resolved. For example, if
an eligible farmer's name has been uploaded on the PM-KISAN portal by the
State/UT Government during the four-monthly period of December 2018-March
2019, he/she is entitled to get the installment pertaining to December 2018-March,
2019 period, and also all subsequent installments. Further, if the eligible farmer's
name is uploaded on the PM-KISAN portal during the four-monthly period of AprilJuly, 2019, he/she is entitled to get the installment pertaining to April-July, 2019
period and also all subsequent installments.

Source: https://pmkisan.gov.in/Documents/RevisedFAQ.pdf
AG/AKP/GS

