Pradhan Mantri Awaas
Yojana – Gramin
PMAY-G: A Door to Dignity
Fulfilling the aspirations of
houseless and poor people of Rural
India

PMAY-G – A door to Dignity

Key of the house opens doors of dignity,
confidence, sure future, new identity and
expanding possibilities.
-Sh. Narendra Modi, Hon’ble Prime Minister of India

1

PMAY-G – A door to Dignity

Contents
Introduction ............................................................................................... 4
Chapter 1: Gaps in Erstwhile Rural Housing Scheme............................ 6
Chapter 2: Pradhan Mantri Awaas Yojana – Gramin – The revamped
Rural Housing Scheme to fulfil the dreams of rural poor .................... 10
Chapter 3: From “House” to “Home” .................................................... 13
Chapter 4: Robust Approach of Identification of Beneficiaries ........... 15
Chapter 5: Focus on Quality Construction ........................................... 16
Chapter 6: Evidence Based Monitoring and Assessment of Impact ... 20
Chapter 7: Going an extra mile during COVID-19 crisis....................... 23
Media Gallery .......................................................................................... 27

2

PMAY-G – A door to Dignity

Beneficiary Name: Anil (MP1935999)
Village: Medhatal
Block: Bichhiya
District: Mandla
State: Madhya Pradesh

3

PMAY-G – A door to Dignity

Introduction
“Home sweet home” has remained one of the most cherished dreams for
every individual. While those who have better resources can afford to have
a decent house of their own, those on the margins of society, socially and
economically, could not manage the same. Crores of people have lived in
huts/shacks under conditions beneath human dignity.
For almost 70 years, there has only been a marginal improvement in the
situation. With the rising population, the absolute number of families living in
huts/shacks has continued to grow.
In May 2014, it was the vision of Prime Minister and the unflinching
commitment of this government to build and provide pucca houses to change
the living conditions of poor people in both rural and urban areas, that
culminated in launch of Pradhan Mantri Awaas Yojana – Gramin and Urban.
Here we document the wonderful story of genesis, evolution, features and
so on of Pradhan Mantri Awaas Yojana - Gramin (PMAY-G) and the
transformation that has been brought in the lives of rural poor on a scale
hitherto unseen.

4

PMAY-G – A door to Dignity

Beneficiary Name: RAMESHWAR MAHTO (JH1618964)
Village: Taranari Madhubani
Block: Chandrapura
District: Bokaro
State: Jharkhand

5

PMAY-G – A door to Dignity

Chapter 1: Gaps in Erstwhile Rural Housing Scheme
Housing is universally recognized as a basic human need. Reducing rural
housing shortage and improving the quality of housing especially for the
poor is an important component of the poverty alleviation strategy of the
Government. Indira Awaas Yojana, as an independent scheme started in
January 1996, but it was riddled with design flaws, leakages, favouritism
and corruption at various levels.
The performance audit conducted by Comptroller and Auditor General
of India (C&AG) in respect of the scheme of Indira Awaas Yojana (IAY)
in the year 2014 identified various gaps in its implementation.

In short, Indira Awaas Yojana could not bridge the gap in housing shortage
in the country significantly and the problem of housing shortage assessed at
the beginning of XIth Five Year Plan remained almost static.
Efforts taken to complete sanctioned houses under IAY
The Indira Awaas Yojana (IAY) has been revamped into Pradhan Mantri
Awaas Yojana – Gramin (PMAY-G) with effect from 1stApril 2016. The
6

PMAY-G – A door to Dignity
Ministry has taken steps to ensure completion of pending IAY houses. The
States have been provided with additional funds for completion of pending
IAY houses. The status of closure of pending IAY houses is being reviewed
at both Central and State Government level. As a result of this monitoring,
44.94 lakh IAY houses have been completed since 2016-17 till FY 2022-23.
The progressive reforms of the PMAY-G have also been extended to IAY
houses, enabling beneficiaries to construct decent houses for themselves.

7

PMAY-G – A door to Dignity

I have a dream, when India attains 7 5 y e a r s o f
I n d e p e n d e n c e , t h e poorest of poor in the
country has a pucca house of his own. Pradhan
Mantri Awaas Yojana is linked with the dignity of
the citizens and the focus of the Yojana is to
ensure m o r e w o m e n , D i v y a n g s i s t e r s and
brothers,

SC,

ST,

OBC,

and

Minority

communities get access to housing”

-Sh. Narendra Modi,
Hon’ble Prime Minister

8

PMAY-G – A door to Dignity

Beneficiary Name: Shiv Mangal (CH1062457)
Village: Kanchapur
Block: Baikunthpur
District: Korea
State: Chhattisgarh

9

PMAY-G – A door to Dignity

Chapter 2: Pradhan Mantri Awaas Yojana – Gramin – The revamped
Rural Housing Scheme to fulfil the dreams of rural poor
To address the gaps in the erstwhile rural housing schemes and in view of
Government’s commitment of providing “Housing for All” by 2024, Indira
Awaas Yojana was re-structured into Pradhan Mantri Awaas Yojana –Gramin
(PMAY-G) and was launched by Prime Minister on 20thNovember 2016 with
an objective of constructing 2.95 Crore houses by the year 2024.
PMAY-G aims to provide a pucca house with basic amenities to all houseless
families and families living in kutcha and dilapidated house in rural areas by
2024.
As per housing deprivation data of Socio – Economic Caste Census (SECC)2011 survey, 2.95 crore beneficiaries were identified to be provided with
houses by March, 2022. However, as per the recent assessment, 82 lakh
households have either constructed their houses during the intervening
period or found ineligible, leaving 2.13 crore eligible beneficiaries in the
Permanent Wait List. As on 14.11.2022, 2.48 crore houses have been
sanctioned and 2.08 crore houses has been completed.
As a result of reform measures undertaken in implementation of rural housing
scheme (IAY+PMAY-G), a total of 2.83 crore rural homes have been
completed with quality in a span of 9 years (2014-2023).

10

PMAY-G – A door to Dignity
Key features of PMAY-G are:
(i)

Increase in minimum unit (house) size from 20 sq.mt. to 25 sq.mt.
including a dedicated area for hygienic cooking.

(ii)

Increased monetary assistance of Rs.1.20 lakh in plains and
Rs.1.30 lakh in hilly states, difficult areas and Integrated Action
Plan districts in tribal and backward regions.

(iii)

Construction of quality houses by the beneficiaries using local
materials and trained masons.

(iv)

Beneficiary also has a wide bouquet of structurally sound,
aesthetically, culturally and environmentally appropriate house
designs available to choose from rather than standard cement
concrete house designs.

(v)

Awaas+ survey was also conducted to identify those otherwise
eligible households who got left out in the SECC 2011 based
permanent wait List of PMAY-G. Eligible households from this
survey will be included in the PWL with a ceiling of 2.95 crore
houses targeted under PMAY-G.

11

PMAY-G – A door to Dignity

Beneficiary Name: SANJITA BASUMATARY(AS1403057)
Village: RATANPUR
Block: SISUPANI
District: GOMARIGURI
State: Assam

12

PMAY-G – A door to Dignity

Chapter 3: From “House” to “Home”
Convergence with other Government schemes for provision of basic
amenities viz., toilet, drinking water, electricity, clean & efficient
cooking fuel, treatment of solid and liquid waste etc.
•

A toilet has been made an integral part of the PMAY-G house. The house
shall be treated as complete only after the toilet has been constructed.
Support (Rs.12,000/-) for toilets is available Swachh Bharat Mission Gramin (SBM-G), MGNREGA among others.

•

Provision of 90/95 person days of un-skilled labour wage under MGNREGA
for construction of house, over and above the unit assistance. This
amounts to about Rs 18,000/-.

•

The house is electrified through Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Gram Jyoti Yojana
(DDUGJY)/ Saubhagya scheme of Ministry of Power.

•

Free LPG connection is provided through Pradhan Mantri Ujjwala Yojana
(PMUY) of Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas.

•

Efforts are also being made for providing piped water supply under Jal
Jeewan Mission.

Convergence with other schemes

The home of Smt. Bhanwar Kanwar with Solar lights, LPG connection & toilet

13

PMAY-G – A door to Dignity
ADD ONS TO PMAY-G

14

PMAY-G – A door to Dignity

Chapter 4: Robust Approach of Identification of Beneficiaries
One of the most important features of PMAY-G is the robust and
transparent selection of beneficiaries
•
The beneficiaries under PMAY-G are selected on the basis of housing
deprivation parameters in the SECC 2011 data and the list of beneficiaries
is validated by the Gram Sabha. This is done to ensure that the assistance
is provided to the genuine and needy people.
•
Houseless households living in 0, 1 and 2 kutcha wall and kutcha roof
are prioritized under PMAY-G
Beneficiary Awareness and Grievance Redressal

• The Gram Panchayat-wise Permanent Wait List is painted on the walls of
Public buildings and Panchayat offices. It ensures that eligible households
are aware of their eligibility and can bear the wait for their turn.
• To address grievances, if any, in
beneficiary selection, an appellate
process has also been put in place.
Empowerment of Women
• Allotment of house is made jointly
in the name of husband and wife
except in case of widow, unmarried
and separate person. As on 14th
November 2022,
69% of the
houses have been sanctioned
either solely or jointly in the name
of rural women.

15

Men
31%

Women
26%

Joint (Wife &
Husband)
43%

PMAY-G – A door to Dignity

Chapter 5: Focus on Quality Construction
• In order to ensure good quality of house construction, training and
certification programs have been launched pan-India to train rural
masons to construct good houses using locally available material.
• As on 1st November 2022, 1.72 lakh rural masons have been trained
and certified to exacting skill standards (NSQF) to provide quality
masons for construction of the houses.

Brick Masonry

Leveling of Shuttering

Placing of reinforcement steel

Assessment

• A bouquet of house design typologies inclusive of disaster resilient
features and suitable to local geo-climatic conditions are made
available for the beneficiaries to choose the most appropriate design
for their house.

16

PMAY-G – A door to Dignity

• A compendium of region-specific house designs with the name ‘Pahal’
which includes 108 house designs for 62 housing zones in 15 States
has been published by the Ministry.

Evidence based Monitoring
• Geo-tagging and time stamped photographs of different stages of
house construction are linked with the release of subsequent
installments of financial assistance.
• The captured photographs are further being used for reviewing the
construction quality/ completion of the houses under PMAY-G.

17

PMAY-G – A door to Dignity

Due to the basic amenities associated with the house and active participation
of the beneficiary in construction of his Pucca house, there is a sense of
belongingness with the place - an emotive attachment with it, turning a House
into Home.

18

PMAY-G – A door to Dignity
Salient Features of PMAY-G

19

PMAY-G – A door to Dignity

Chapter 6: Evidence Based Monitoring and Assessment of Impact
The scheme is monitored through an end-to end e-Governance model –
using MIS AwaasSoft and AwaasApp, a mobile application.
AwaasSoft – Transaction based MIS of the Scheme

• All critical functions of PMAY-G, right from identification of beneficiary to
providing construction linked assistance are carried out on MISAwaasSoft
• The payment to the beneficiaries is routed through Direct Benefit Transfer
(DBT) into the accounts of the beneficiaries.
AwaasApp – A mobile application

Multi-level Monitoring
•
•
•
•

Social Audit through Community participation
DISHA Committee meetings headed by Members of Parliament
National Level Monitors
Central and State Government officials

20

PMAY-G – A door to Dignity
Impact Assessment
• The evaluation study of Governance reform under PMAY-G conducted
by National Institute of Public Finance and Policy (NIPFP) during 201819 provides that average number of days taken for completion of a
house has come down from 314 days in FY 2015-16 to 114 days in FY
2017-18.
Average number of days in house completion
350

314

300
221

No. of days

250
200
150

114

100
50
0
2015-16

2016-17

2017-18

• The Evaluation Study Report (2020) of NITI Aayog provides that
reforms introduced under PMAY-G have brought improvements in
identification of beneficiaries, use of IT resources and funding pattern
resulted in better performance in completion of houses and in
monitoring mechanisms. The study also highlights improvement in the
standard of living of PMAYG beneficiaries.

21

PMAY-G – A door to Dignity

Beneficiary Name: Subil
Village: Moya
Block: Biora
District: Rajgarh
State: Madhya Pradesh

22

PMAY-G – A door to Dignity

Chapter 7: Going an extra mile during COVID-19 crisis
While inaugurating 1.75 lakh newly constructed houses in the State of
Madhya Pradesh under PMAY-G, Prime Minister Shri Narendra Modi in
September 2020 said that the time for completion of houses under
PMAY-G has been cut from 125 days to a mere 45-60 days during the
pandemic, which is a classic example of converting the coronavirus
crisis into an opportunity.1
Garib Kalyan Rozgar Abhiyan
Under Garib Kalyan Rozgar Abhiyan (GKRA) launched during the
pandemic, a number of projects have been completed across various
states, generating employment opportunities in large scale. As per GKRA
portal, a total expenditure of Rs. 5618.19 Crore has been incurred under
PMAY-G.

1Source: AwaasSoft, a MIS of the PMAY-G.

23

PMAY-G – A door to Dignity
Chapter 8: Success Stories
1: Sashi Barik constructed her house during COVID-19 pandemic period
Due to COVID-19, when the nation was under absolute lock down, Sashi Barik decided to
construct her house, which was sanctioned under PMAY-G. The authorities put all the efforts to
gather construction materials and manpower keeping the unexpected lockdown in mind. As a
result, Sashi could complete the houses in all aspects within one month of receiving the first
instalment.

After

Before

Beneficiary: Sashi Barik (OR4160180), Balangir district, Odisha
“Now we are happily living in a cement concrete house. Thanks to Government for supporting the
poor families like us to build a pucca house. Now I am the proud owner of this house,” says 80year widow Sashi Barik, who was living in a dilapidated house in Tebhadunguri village of Hirapur
Gram Panchyat under Loisingha Block in Balangir district.
Her son is a daily wage labourer. With his little earning, they are able to get two meals a day for
the 5-member family. A pucca house was always a distant dream for them. But Government has
supported them with financial assistance of Rs 130,000/- under rural housing scheme to build a
pucca house. For early completion of house, Sashi will receive an incentive amount of Rs 20,000/from the Government.
24

PMAY-G – A door to Dignity
2: A story from Naxal affected area of Chhattisgarh

After

Before

25

PMAY-G – A door to Dignity
3: A dream come true for Bandhna Oraon
Bandhna Oraon, a 59 years old resident of village Chapka in remote Ghagra block of
Gumla district was residing in a one room kutcha house. His family was facing hardship
to live in a kutcha house especially in rainy and winter season. Hischildren used to get
sick during the season and it was very difficult for him to arrange the medicines due to
poverty.
In such poor condition, construction of a pucca house was only a dream for Bandhna.
Here called that this dream became a reality only because of Pradhan Mantri Awaas
Yojana-Gramin.

After

Before

Bandhna constructed his house with the help of family members. Awaas Mitra also
supported him in arranging the construction materials. Bandhna is now living in his new
house with his family. He is happy and confident to face any situation now. He is the
owner of a pucca house and it has enhanced his status in the society. He is now
encouraging other people in the village to complete the house in shortest time period
possible.

26

PMAY-G – A door to Dignity

Media Gallery

27

PMAY-G – A door to Dignity

28

