Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojna
Details
Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana (PMFBY) was launched from Kharif 2016 with aim to support production in agriculture by providing an affordable crop insurance product to ensure comprehensive risk cover for crops of farmers against all non-preventable natural risks from pre-sowing to post-harvest stage. The Scheme has completed 8 crop seasons and is being implemented across States/Union Territories (UTs).
After the commencement of the Scheme, The Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (MoA&FW), Government of India (GoI) has endeavoured to make the Scheme more effective, transparent and auto-administration driven with the intention to minimize manual interventions and eliminate usage of variable methodologies for implementation and execution on the ground. This was facilitated by a detailed set of Operational Guidelines (OGs) and by leveraging efficient and cutting-edge technological solutions.
Based on the past experiences of implementing the Scheme (between 2016-2018), study reports of various research institutions and feedback received from stakeholders, the scheme was reviewed and the revised OGs were brought into effect from 01 Oct 2018 addressing major challenges. However, few challenges remained, especially long term tendering, optional coverage to all farmers, increase in the scope of risk cover and the addition of add-on covers. These issues were still required to be addressed in order to increase the acceptability and efficacy of the Scheme as well as meet the aspirations of stakeholders as per varied requirements of region-wise agrarian conditions. The MoA&FW had instituted a stakeholder consultation with State Governments, Farmers Organizations, ICs, Re-Insurance Companies, Financial Institutions, Research and Technical Organizations and the Central Government Ministries and Departments to identify the key challenges and finalize possible solutions/remedial measures to address such challenges. Based on the outcome of the consultations and discussions, the required corrections/changes were approved by the Union Cabinet for incorporation in the OGs of PMFBY/Restructured Weather Based Crop Insurance Scheme (RWBICS). Accordingly, the OGs have been updated for reference and adoption by all stakeholders for effective implementation of the revamped PMFBY/RWBCIS.

Objective: The PMFBY works on the One Nation, One Crop, One Premium. To provide insurance coverage and financial support to the farmers in the event of failure of any of the notified crops as a result of natural calamities, pests & diseases.
To stabilize the income of farmers to ensure their continuance in farming.
To encourage farmers to adopt innovative and modern agricultural practices.
To ensure the flow of credit to the agriculture sector.

Implementation Agency
The Scheme shall be implemented through a multi-agency framework by selected insurance companies under the overall guidance & control of the Department of Agriculture, Cooperation & Farmers Welfare (DAC&FW), Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (MoA&FW), Government of India (GOI) and the concerned State in co-ordination with various other agencies; viz Financial Institutions like Commercial Banks, Co-operative Banks, Regional Rural Banks and their regulatory bodies, Government Departments viz. Agriculture, Co-operation, Horticulture, Statistics, Revenue, Information/Science & Technology, Panchayati Raj etc
Notified Area: Notified Area is the Unit of Insurance decided by the State Govt. for notifying a Crop during a season. 

Risks to be covered : 
Yield Losses: Comprehensive risk insurance is provided to cover yield losses due to non-preventable risks, such as
Natural Fire and Lightning
Storms, Hailstorms, Cyclones, Typhoons, Tempest, Hurricanes, Tornados, etc.
Flood, Inundation, and Landslide
Drought, Dry spells
Pests/ Diseases etc.
Prevented Sowing  (on notified area basis):- In cases where the majority of the insured farmers of a notified area, having the intent to sow/plant and incurred expenditure for the purpose, are prevented from sowing/planting the insured crop due to adverse weather conditions, shall be eligible for indemnity claims upto a maximum of 25% of the sum insured
Post-Harvest Losses (individual farm basis): Coverage is available upto a maximum period of 14 days from harvesting for those crops which are kept in “cut & spread” condition to dry in the field after harvesting, against specific perils of cyclone / cyclonic rains, unseasonal rains throughout the country. 
Localized Calamities (individual farm basis): Loss/damage resulting from the occurrence of identified localized risks i.e. hailstorm, landslide, and Inundation affecting isolated farms in the notified area.

Benefits
The benefits of this scheme are mentioned as under: 
Comprehensive insurance coverage for Kharif and Rabi crops.
Add on the coverage available for specific circumstances.
Optional for farmers, both loanee and non-loanee.
Stability in the income of farmers so that they can continue farming.

Premium Rate :
S. No.	Season	Crops	Maximum Insurance charges payable by the farmer - (% of Sum Insured)
1	Kharif	Food & Oilseeds crops (all cereals, millets, & oilseeds, pulses) - 2.0% of SI or Actuarial rate,  whichever is less
2	Rabi	Food & Oilseeds crops (all cereals, millets, & oilseeds, pulses) - 1.5% of SI or Actuarial rate, whichever is less
3	Kharif & Rabi	Annual Commercial / Annual Horticultural crops - 5% of SI or Actuarial rate, whichever is less

The difference between the premium rate and the rate of Insurance charges payable by farmers shall be treated as Rate of Normal Premium Subsidy, which shall be shared equally by the Centre and State.

Eligibility
The farmer must be a cultivator or a sharecropper on the insured land.
Farmers must have a valid and authenticated land ownership certificate or a valid land tenancy agreement.
The farmer must have applied for insurance coverage within the prescribed time frame, which is generally within 2 weeks of the start of the sowing season.
They must not have received any compensation for the same crop loss from any other source.
The farmer should have a valid bank account and provide details of their bank account, along with a valid identity proof, at the time of enrollment
All farmers growing notified crops in a notified area during the season who have an insurable interest in the crop are eligible.

Exclusions
Exclusions: Risks and Losses arising out of the following perils shall be excluded:-
War & kindred perils, nuclear risks, riots, malicious damage, theft, act of enmity, grazed and/or destroyed by domestic and/or wild animals, In case of Post–Harvest losses the harvested crop bundled and heaped at a place before threshing, other preventable risks

Application Process
Online
How to Apply 
Applicant farmers have to visit the official portal.﻿
Click on Farmer Corner
If the applicants do not have an account on the portal, click on Guest Farmer. Fill in all the details correctly and click on submit. An account will be created.
Fill out the form in the insurance scheme and provide the required details

How to Claim?
In case of crop loss, farmers are required to file a claim with the insurance company within the prescribed time frame, which is generally within 72 hours of the occurrence of the loss.
List of concerned person/company details on the portal and click in "Report Crop Loss" or download the app and report crop loss.
The claim must be accompanied by supporting documents, such as photographs of the damaged crop and a report from the village-level committee (VLC) or the agriculture department.

Documents Required
Bank account number.
Aadhaar card.
Khasra number of land.
Agreement photocopy.
Ration card.
Voter ID.
Driving license.
Passport-size photograph of the farmer.

Frequently Asked Questions
I am not the owner of land, can I get crop insurance under this scheme?
Yes, if you are a tenant on someone else’s farm, you are eligible to get your crop insured under this scheme.

How can I calculate my insurance premium in NCIP?
There is an insurance premium calculator on https://pmfby.gov.in/ where you can fill in the basic details and calculate the premium.

Am I eligible for a claim if only my land is affected by a calamity?
Yes, you need to inform through the crop insurance app or toll free number, insurance company, the bank or the concerned official within 72 hours of the incident, you’ll be eligible for the loss assessment and claim.

Which documents do I need to apply for the scheme?
Khasra, khatauni, bank account details, and Aadhaar are needed along with the declaration about the crop you are planning to sow.

Can I apply for the scheme online myself?
Yes, create your farmer’s login account in the NCIP https://pmfby.gov.in/ and select “Farmer Corner” on the portal. There you can apply for the scheme after logging in.

How do I check the status of my application?
In the NCIP https://pmfby.gov.in/ select “Application Status”, fill in the receipt number as prompted and you’ll be able to see the status of your application.

When should I report the crop loss?
You should report the crop loss through the crop insurance app, or toll-free number, or directly to the concerned authority within 72 hours of the calamity.

How can I report crop loss?
You can report the crop loss through the NCIP https://pmfby.gov.in/ by selecting “Report Crop Loss” or through Mobile Application, the centralized Toll-Free Number, directly to the Insurance Company through its dedicated toll-free number or through the concerned bank, local agriculture department Government/district officials.

How can I claim the insurance?
The farmer should intimate about the crop loss within 72 hours of the calamity through Mobile Application, the centralized Toll-Free Number, directly to the Insurance Company through its dedicated toll-free number or through the concerned bank, local agriculture department Government/district officials. However, the first mode of intimation should be either Crop Insurance App or the centralised Toll-Free Number. After that duly filled intimation / application of crop insurance app along with all relevant documents is necessary for initiation of loss assessment and payment of claims.

How will I know if I have received the claim?
You’ll be intimated by SMS about the benefit transfer on your registered mobile number.